---
title: "Simulations of dynamo action in slowly rotating M dwarfs: Dependence on dimensionless parameters"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2023-10-paper-2
excerpt: 'Ortiz-Rodríguez, C. A. ; Käpylä, P. J. ; Navarrete, F. H. ; Schleicher, D. R. G. ; Mennickent, R. E. ; **Hidalgo, J. P.** ; Toro-Velásquez, B.'
date: 2023-10
venue: 'Astronomy & Astrophysics'
paperurl: 'https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023A%26A...678A..82O/abstract'
citation: 'Ortiz-Rodríguez, C. A., Käpylä, P. J., Navarrete, F. H., et al. 2023'
---
Aims: The aim of this study is to explore the magnetic and flow properties of fully convective M dwarfs as a function of rotation period Prot and magnetic Reynolds ReM and Prandlt numbers PrM.
Methods: We performed three-dimensional simulations of fully convective stars using a star-in-a-box set-up. This set-up allows global dynamo simulations in a sphere embedded in a Cartesian cube. The equations of non-ideal magnetohydrodynamics were solved with the PENCIL CODE. We used the stellar parameters of an M5 dwarf with 0.21 M⊙ at three rotation rates corresponding to rotation periods (Prot) of 43, 61, and 90 days, and varied the magnetic Prandtl number in the range from 0.1 to 10.
Results: We found systematic differences in the behaviour of the large-scale magnetic field as functions of rotation and PrM. For the simulations with Prot = 43 days and PrM ≤ 2, we found cyclic large-scale magnetic fields. For PrM > 2, the cycles vanish and the field shows irregular reversals. In the simulations with Prot = 61 days for PrM ≤ 2, the cycles are less clear and the reversal are less periodic. In the higher PrM cases, the axisymmetric mean field shows irregular variations. For the slowest rotation case with Prot = 90 days, the field has an important dipolar component for PrM ≤ 5. For the highest PrM the large-scale magnetic field is predominantly irregular at mid-latitudes, with quasi-stationary fields near the poles. For the simulations with cycles, the cycle period length slightly increases with increasing ReM.
